---
title: SOCGEN 180
---

[HOME](README.md)

SOCGEN 180: Data in and out of a Pandemic 
=====

**FALL 2020**
Final Project 

### Introduction 
In early 2020, the world started to see the development of a pandemic like none has ever witnessed before and from this came a global state of emergency. Out of Wuhan, China came an unknown disease established as severe respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS - CoV - 2), otherwise called COVID - 19. However, due to the unprecedented nature of this disease, multiple countries all over the world, including the United States, have had issues with underreporting and undertesting COVID - 19 cases (Lau et al., 2020, p.2 ). Issues with misrepresentation of COVID - 19 data in the United States can play a vital role in  influencing vital decisions regarding healthcare and possibly lead to higher mortality rates (Lau et al., 2020, p.2 ). 

A way to deal with this issue can be the introduction of mobile phone technology to collect key information about COVID-19 symptoms from users. The usage of mobile devices to monitor individuals and collect necessary data can play an important role in mitigating the spread and preventing the onset of COVID-19. However the development and implementation of this new technology can infringe on each individual’s right to privacy. With careful planning and transparency, it could be possible to quell the fears of the masses regarding privacy issues while simultaneously integrating new technology to prevent further deaths due to COVID-19. 

### Background 
To respond to and control for the spread of COVID-19, governments all over the world started to develop national policies in order to restrain the spread and reduce mortality rates (Hsiang et al.,  2020, p. 262). However, before national policies were enacted, the growing rate of infection for COVID-19 was reported to be 38% per day (Hsiang et al., 2020, p. 262). But after the establishment of national policies to slow the rate of infection, the interventions delayed 61 million confirmed cases which approximately equates to 495 million total infections (Hsiang et al., 2020, p. 262).  

Although this may seem like an effective statistic, the truth of the matter is some countries are more efficient at curbing the spread of COVID-19. For example, countries such as France, Italy, and the United States have had high numbers of either underreported or undetected cases (Lau et al., 2020, p.2 ) thus, showing the quality of a county’s infection report can widely vary. The reason for underreporting can vary by country and can be attributed to a large number of factors such as population density, quality of a nation’s health system, religion, media, and not being equipped with enough resources (Lau et al., 2020, p.2 ). Ultimately, the extent of a nation’s underreporting can lead to increased mortality rates. 

To address the issue of underreporting in the United States, digital technology should be introduced into the contact tracing pipeline in order to maximize efficiency. Currently, the majority of contact tracing is done manually by workers in public health. Contact tracing is split up into three steps (Dar et al., 2020, p.2). The first step is to identify the confirmed positive individual and reach out to them and find out anyone they came in close proximity to. The next step is listing all possible exposed individuals and reaching out to this network and informing them of possible exposure. The last step is following up with the original exposed individual and their network to ensure no further unnecessary contact and spread of possible COVID - 19 symptoms (Dar et al., 2020, p.2). 

However, the process of contact tracing takes a large network of public health fieldworkers collaborating to mitigate the spread of the disease (Fahey & Hino, 2020, p.2) therefore, this process is both costly and labor intensive (Dar et al., 2020, p.2). Additionally, with so many steps, there is a lot of room for error. Figure 1 below shows all of the cases reported to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention for each United States territory or state (CDC 2020). The total cases are split further into confirmed and probable cases. However, as can be seen by Figure 1, many places do not have sufficient data to report if a case was either a confirmed case or probable case, therefore showing incomplete data. On the Center for Disease Control and Prevention Website, any categories not complete are listed as “NA” however, this label can have a variety of meanings and cause further unnecessary confusion. 

<iframe title="Figure 1. Reported United States COVID-19 Cases " aria-label="Split Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-QKX0Q" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/QKX0Q/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="7708"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}}))}();
</script>

### Solutions 
The solution to this laborious and flawed process is the integration of digital technology into contact tracing efforts in order to automate the data collection process and alleviate the government’s limited resources (Dar et al., 2020, p. 2-3). More specifically, the introduction of mobile phones into the contract tracing process can prove to be a vital tool in order to assist with slowing down the spread of COVID-19 (Oliver et al., 2020, p.1). By using mobile phone data, it is possible to create newer models that may improve accuracy of COVID - 19 spread. The usage of mobile phones will be able to more accurately track COVID - 19 cases and provide more information of positive individuals and any possible exposed connections in their network. 

Mobile phones will be able to keep a record of call detail which contain information about the time the call was placed as well as the cell tower that the phone was connected to when the phone was in use (Oliver et al., 2020, p.1). This may be important for viewing where the individual was as well as with whom their recent interactions were with. Furthermore, routine information including location data can be collected through mobile phone applications by intelligence and ad companies as well as local bluetooth devices in the proximity (Oliver et al., 2020, p.1). Mobile data with bluetooth contact data can give us information about not just individuals and their locations, but also their social networks (Oliver et al., 2020, p.1). 

Some previous work on human mobility shows that aggregate mobile phone data can assist in modeling the spread of epidemics, including COVID-19, thus, why multiple governments have started to collaborate with mobile network operators to create control measures involving the collection of mobile phone data (Oliver et al., 2020, p.1). By collecting phone data and creating models, governments can then mobilize resources to the correct space (Oliver et al., 2020, p.2). Mobility data allows us to have predictive capabilities so that necessary stakeholders can triage for future risks or opportunities that may arise (Oliver et al., 2020, p.2). Real-time data will allow us to assess current policies as well as the efficiency and quality of potential measures that will be put in place once quarantine policies are lifted (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). 

It will be necessary to find the optimal combinations of policies to enact as well as the correct time in which to install them (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). These combinations of policies will include decisions about general mobility for individuals to move within, adjusted policies on large gatherings, school closures, etc (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). It will be helpful to triage using mobile phone data where these measures are effective and where they are not by the population (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). By measuring someone’s time outside, home, or work after policies are put in place with new mobility orders, it will allow local governments to measure compliance and to adopt necessary countermeasures (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3).

### Concerns 
There remains controversy around the introduction of mobile phone monitoring public health purposes and an unwillingness to implement this technology into the current contract tracing process. This is a concern for the inability of public health authorities and researchers to be able to protect data for its citizens (Fahey & Hino, 2020, p.2-3). The concern for one’s digital privacy is valid due to previous news in the media about misuse of an individual’s data and the contribution to personal scandal and whether the lack of consensus on which policies should be established to keep this data safe (Fahey & Hino, 2020, p.2-3). Additionally, a review of previous studies regarding digital technologies in controlling pandemics has been largely unproven as there isn’t current sufficient evidence to measure its impact (Anglemeyer et al., 2020).  

Multiple countries have rolled out their own contact tracing applications, specific to only their country with no cross - country collaboration, showing how each country’s inability to come together to create a universal system (Fahey & Hino, 2020, p.3-4). This also shows the sentiment of countries’ wariness to each other of who gets access to the respective national data (Fahey & Hino, 2020, p. 3-4). The United States specifically has yet to roll a centralized digital contact tracing system, although Apple and Google have collaborated to slowly roll a mobile tracing system out (Brandom, 2020). The burden of creating a software system to execute contract tracing initiatives has somewhat fallen on these large technology giants because United States government and public authorities alike are either unaware or are lacking in the capacity to process complex information, especially information that requires a multidisciplinary expertise (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). In addition, many governmental agencies are understaffed and do not have the technological teams or equipment ready to launch such an endeavor (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). 

Figures 5 and 6  above represent distributions of survey data collected from the Pew Research Center (Pew Research Center, 2020). In 2019, the Pew Research Center asked a total of 4,272 individuals, split into two groups, to answer a set of questions about their concerns about privacy. Group 1, which had a sample size of 2,140, was asked the following questions which are represented in the charts above. In figure 5, participants were asked if they were concerned about the government using their data and 1 represents very concerned, 2 concerned, 3 a little concerned, and 4 is no concern. From the figure, a majority of participants were either concerned or very concerned. Figure 6 asks the benefits participants feel from the government using their personal information. 1 represents the participant felt they benefited a lot, 2 is some benefit, 3 is very little benefit, and 4 is no benefit According to figure 6, most participants felt they received very little benefit or benefit from government usage of their private information. 

### Appeals 
These conflicting arguments about the possible usage of smartphones highlight the true debate about what society should prioritize: individualism versus collectivism. Individualism allows for people to think of their own interests at heart and it can be difficult to consider other people and the seriousness of COVID-19 if the individual themself does not have direct experience with the disease. Collectivism allows for the wishes of the group to be carried out and the well-being of the group to be put at greater priority, but at the cost of some personal liberties. By opting into smartphone technology, many are afraid of losing some of their personal liberty even at the cost of not slowing down the spread of the disease. Significant impact could be made if governments and public officials worked together to address the concerns of the general populace in an informative way. This includes making mobile phone efforts and data collection more transparent and possibly creating an external ethics and privacy advisory committee to oversee projects. It is important governments become aware of their shortcomings and create multidisciplinary teams that will be ready to tackle the new problems that will come of creating a useful framework to assess the ongoing pandemic (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). Therefore while the privacy concerns are valid, the collectivist mindset should be adopted along with mobile phone technology in order to reduce mortality rates, slow the spread of the virus until a vaccine is safely created, and alleviate the strain on our exhausted medical system. 

### Conclusion
As the pandemic rages on with no clear near end in sight, current methods of controlling the spread of COVID - 19 and reducing mortality rates has proven to be largely costly and labor intensive. Manual contract tracing requires too much manpower with room for error causing issues in updated databases and an underreporting of cases. A possible solution would be the introduction of smartphones in order to automate the contract tracing process. Although there are concerns with privacy and the ability of the government to secure large inputs of information as well as their technology competency, the introduction of mobile phones could turn the tides of the pandemic in the United States, which stands divided on how to mitigate the effects on the pandemic in a unified manner.

Referencing figures 2, 3, and 4, data was retrieved from the Kaiser Family Foundation in order to analyze what the current policies are in the United States (KFF, 2020). At a glance, when it comes to policies on how to best protect their citizens, each state has only its own well-being in mind, so there is no general consensus or policy on how to act together to mitigate the effects of the pandemic. Therefore, it may prove to be difficult to unite the people under one large initiative. However, if the general United States population could put aside their apprehensiveness about digital technology and the government can recognize their own shortcomings and work to remedy their weaknesses, this project could launch successfully. 

Furthermore, the benefits of mobile phones could last long after the pandemic if proven successful. After the pandemic ends, mobile phone data can be used to analyze the impact of various interventions on the progression of the disease and cost benefit analysis of various quarantine restrictions (Oliver et al., 2020, p.3). If the integration of mobile phone technology and analysis assists with the pandemic and proves successful then it could usher in other future initiatives of digital technology to tackle other major global health problems (Ting et al.,  2020, p. 460). It could also increase general public and governmental acceptance of technology into healthcare and possibly address smaller scale, but still relevant issues such as chronic disease (Ting et al.,  2020, p. 461). 

### References 
1. Anglemyer, A., Moore, T. H., Parker, L., Chambers, T., Grady, A., Chiu, K., Parry, M., Wilczynska, M., Flemyng, E., & Bero, L. (2020). Digital contact tracing technologies in epidemics: A rapid review. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 8. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD013699

2. Brandom, R. (2020, September 1). Apple and Google announce new automatic app system to track COVID exposures. The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2020/9/1/21410281/apple-google-coronavirus-exposure-notification-contact-tracing-app-system

3. CDC. (2020, March 28). COVID-19 Cases, Deaths, and Trends in the US | CDC COVID Data Tracker. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker

4. Dar, A. B., Lone, A. H., Zahoor, S., Khan, A. A., & Naaz, R. (2020). Applicability of mobile contact tracing in fighting pandemic (COVID-19): Issues, challenges and solutions. Computer Science Review, 38, 100307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2020.100307

5. Fahey, R. A., & Hino, A. (2020). COVID-19, digital privacy, and the social limits on data-focused public health responses. International Journal of Information Management, 55, 102181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102181

6. Hsiang, S., Allen, D., Annan-Phan, S., Bell, K., Bolliger, I., Chong, T., Druckenmiller, H., Huang, L. Y., Hultgren, A., Krasovich, E., Lau, P., Lee, J., Rolf, E., Tseng, J., & Wu, T. (2020). The effect of large-scale anti-contagion policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature, 584(7820), 262–267. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2404-8

7. KFF - State COVID-19 Dashboard. (n.d.). Tableau Software. Retrieved November 21, 2020, from https://public.tableau.com/views/KFF-StateCoronavirusTracker-UpdateAAv11_KOEdits_20200423_15881952183820/Overview?:display_count=y&publish=yes&:origin=viz_share_link&:showVizHome=no

8. Lau, H., Khosrawipour, T., Kocbach, P., Ichii, H., Bania, J., & Khosrawipour, V. (2020). Evaluating the massive underreporting and undertesting of COVID-19 cases in multiple global epicenters. Pulmonology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pulmoe.2020.05.015

9. NW, 1615 L. St, Suite 800Washington, & Inquiries, D. 20036USA202-419-4300 | M.-857-8562 | F.-419-4372 | M. (n.d.). American Trends Panel Wave 49. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. Retrieved November 21, 2020, from https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/dataset/american-trends-panel-wave-49/

10. Oliver, N., Lepri, B., Sterly, H., Lambiotte, R., Deletaille, S., Nadai, M. D., Letouzé, E., Salah, A. A., Benjamins, R., Cattuto, C., Colizza, V., Cordes, N. de, Fraiberger, S. P., Koebe, T., Lehmann, S., Murillo, J., Pentland, A., Pham, P. N., Pivetta, F., … Vinck, P. (2020). Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle. Science Advances, 6(23), eabc0764. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abc0764

11. Ting, D. S. W., Carin, L., Dzau, V., & Wong, T. Y. (2020). Digital technology and COVID-19. Nature Medicine, 26(4), 459–461. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0824-5
